This document contains the PrivacyLens deployment guide and the general manual.

PrivacyLens is an extension for the Shibboleth Identity Provider 2.x. It provides an interface to allow users to review the personal information that will be sent to a requesting web site, and to opt in or out of disclosing it. PrivacyLens grew out of "uApprove":http://www.switch.ch/aai/uApprove, and its module to present a Terms of Use page has been kept. PrivacyLens' web page is at "www.privacylens.org":http://www.privacylens.org/

Notes about this guide:
* This guide assumes that PrivacyLens will be installed on a Linux system. It's also possible to install it on a different operating system. In this case, you may need to adapt some paths and commands accordingly.
* The guide shows paths and commands using variables like, e.g, @$SHIB_DIST$@, @$SHIB_INSTALL$@ or @$PLENS_DIST$@. You need to expand these variables to the real paths, except where it is explicitly stated that you don't need to expand them.

{toc}

h1. 1 Installation

h2. 1.1 Prerequisites

* "Shibboleth Identity Provider":http://shibboleth.net/, version 2.3 or greater.
* "PrivacyLens":http://www.privacylens.org/, either source or binary package.
* Database which supports JDBC(Java Database Connectivity).

h2. 1.2 Building PrivacyLens from source

If you are not using a downloaded binary package of PrivacyLens, create
one using Maven with the command @mvn install@. This will create a binary
package ZIP file in the @target/@ directory.

h2. 1.3 Library Installation

If the Shibboleth Identity Provider has not yet been installed, proceed with a normal installation of Shibboleth. Make a note of the directory you unpacked the
source to (@$SHIB_DIST$@, e.g. @/usr/local/src/shibboleth-identity-provider-#version#@), and the directory the web application was installed into (@$SHIB_INSTALL$@, e.g. @/opt/shibboleth-idp@).

Ensure your installation of Shibboleth is working correctly.

* Unpack the binary package ZIP file in @$PLENS_DIST$@ (e.g., @/usr/local/src/PrivacyLens-#version#@).
* Copy the jar files to Shibboleth's library directory:
** @cp $PLENS_DIST$/lib/*.jar $SHIB_DIST$/lib@
** @cp $PLENS_DIST$/lib/jdbc/*.jar $SHIB_DIST$/lib@
* Copy the JDBC connector for your database to Shibboleth's classpath. PrivacyLens itself already provides "MySQL":http://mysql.com or "HSQL":http://hsqldb.org JDBC connectors: <br /> @cp $PLENS_DIST$/lib/jdbc/optional/#jdbc-connector#.jar $SHIB_DIST$/lib@

Ensure that only one version of each jar file is present in @$SHIB_DIST$/lib@.

h2. 1.4 Configuration Template

Copy the configuration template to Shibboleth's configuration directory:

* @cp $PLENS_DIST$/manual/configuration/PrivacyLens.properties $SHIB_INSTALL$/conf@
* @cp $PLENS_DIST$/manual/configuration/PrivacyLens.xml $SHIB_INSTALL$/conf@
* @cp $PLENS_DIST$/manual/configuration/spsetup.json $SHIB_INSTALL$/conf@

h2. 1.5 PrivacyLens view templates

Copy the PrivacyLens view templates (JSP(Java Server Pages)s, CSS(Cascading Style Sheet) files and images) to a directory under Shibboleth's webapp directory:

* @mkdir $SHIB_DIST$/src/main/webapp/PrivacyLens@
* @cp -r $PLENS_DIST$/webapp/* $SHIB_DIST$/src/main/webapp/PrivacyLens@

h2. 1.6 Database Preparation

bq(note). The following database parameters are examples. Adapt the values as necessary. Choose a secure password.

* Create a database with the name "PrivacyLens".
* Create a database user with the username "PrivacyLens" and password "secret".
* Grant @INSERT, SELECT, UPDATE, DELETE@ rights to user "PrivacyLens".
* Create the initial table structures using the schemas:
** @$PLENS_DIST$/manual/storage/attribute-release-schema.sql@
** @$PLENS_DIST$/manual/storage/terms-of-use-schema.sql@

h1. 2 Basic Deployment

h2. 2.1 Web Application Deployment Descriptor

Extend Shibboleth's web application deployment descriptor (@$SHIB_DIST$/src/main/webapp/WEB-INF/web.xml@). Adapt your existing file as shown below.
* Add @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.xml@ to the @contextConfigLocation@ context parameter. Do not expand the @$IDP_HOME$@ variables here. They are handled by Shibboleth's install script.
* Add the required filters and servlets as shown.

bc.. 

<web-app ...>

    <context-param>
        <param-name>contextConfigLocation</param-name>
        <param-value>$IDP_HOME$/conf/internal.xml; $IDP_HOME$/conf/service.xml; $IDP_HOME$/conf/PrivacyLens.xml</param-value>
    </context-param>

    <!-- IdP Listeners, Filters and Servlets -->
    <!-- ...                                 -->
    
    
    <!-- PrivacyLens Filter and Servlets -->
    
    <filter>
        <filter-name>PrivacyLens</filter-name>
        <filter-class>edu.cmu.ece.PrivacyLens.Intercepter</filter-class>
    </filter>

    <filter-mapping>
        <filter-name>PrivacyLens</filter-name>
        <url-pattern>/profile/Shibboleth/SSO</url-pattern>
        <url-pattern>/profile/SAML1/SOAP/AttributeQuery</url-pattern>
        <url-pattern>/profile/SAML1/SOAP/ArtifactResolution</url-pattern>
        <url-pattern>/profile/SAML2/POST/SSO</url-pattern>
        <url-pattern>/profile/SAML2/POST-SimpleSign/SSO</url-pattern>
        <url-pattern>/profile/SAML2/Redirect/SSO</url-pattern>
        <url-pattern>/profile/SAML2/Unsolicited/SSO</url-pattern>
        <url-pattern>/Authn/UserPassword</url-pattern>
    </filter-mapping>

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>PrivacyLens - Terms Of Use</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>ch.SWITCH.aai.uApprove.tou.ToUServlet</servlet-class>
    </servlet>

    <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>PrivacyLens - Terms Of Use</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/PrivacyLens/TermsOfUse</url-pattern>
    </servlet-mapping>

    <servlet>
        <servlet-name>PrivacyLens - Attribute Release</servlet-name>
        <servlet-class>edu.cmu.ece.PrivacyLens.ar.AttributeReleaseServlet</servlet-class>
    </servlet>

    <servlet-mapping>
        <servlet-name>PrivacyLens - Attribute Release</servlet-name>
        <url-pattern>/PrivacyLens/AttributeRelease</url-pattern>
    </servlet-mapping>

<servlet>
<servlet-name>PrivacyLens - AR Admin</servlet-name>
<servlet-class>edu.cmu.ece.PrivacyLens.ar.AdminServlet</servlet-class>
</servlet>

<servlet-mapping>
<servlet-name>PrivacyLens - AR Admin</servlet-name>
<url-pattern>/PrivacyLens/AdminServlet</url-pattern>
</servlet-mapping>

<servlet>
<servlet-name>PrivacyLens - AR AJAX</servlet-name>
<servlet-class>edu.cmu.ece.PrivacyLens.ar.AttributeReleaseAjaxServlet</servlet-class>
</servlet>

<servlet-mapping>
<servlet-name>PrivacyLens - AR AJAX</servlet-name>
<url-pattern>/PrivacyLens/AttributeReleaseAjaxServlet</url-pattern>
</servlet-mapping>

<servlet>
<servlet-name>PrivacyLens - Debug</servlet-name>
<servlet-class>edu.cmu.ece.PrivacyLens.DebugViewServlet</servlet-class>
</servlet>

<servlet-mapping>
<servlet-name>PrivacyLens - Debug</servlet-name>
<url-pattern>/PrivacyLens/DebugView</url-pattern>
</servlet-mapping>

</web-app>
h2. 2.2 Custom Configuration

In @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.xml@ change:

bc. 
<context:property-placeholder location="classpath:/configuration/PrivacyLens.properties" />

to:

bc. 
<context:property-placeholder location="file:$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.properties" />

Do expand the variable $SHIB_INSTALL$ here (so that the location value looks like e.g. @file:/opt/shibboleth-idp/conf/PrivacyLens.properties@).

Customize @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.properties@ according your database environment and required features. See inline documentation of PrivacyLens.properties for configuration options.

In case you enable the 'Terms of Use' module (disabled by default), you need to provide an appropriate text
suitable for your organization.

An example 'Terms Of Use' HTML file can be found in @$PLENS_DIST$/manual/examples/terms-of-use.html@.

* Copy @$PLENS_DIST$/manual/examples/terms-of-use.html@ to @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/terms-of-use.html@.

bc. cp $PLENS_DIST$/manual/examples/terms-of-use.html $SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/terms-of-use.html

* Adapt @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/terms-of-use.html@ as required.
* Adapt the value of @tou.resource@ in @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.properties@ accordingly.

bc. tou.resource = file:$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/terms-of-use.html

h2. 2.3 Custom Templates

In case you want to customize the templates, follow section "Custom View Templates":#CustomViewTemplates.

You should at the least copy your organization's logo to the file @$SHIB_DIST$/src/main/webapp/PrivacyLens/logo.png@, since a placeholder logo is installed by default.
You may also want to put your federation's logo to the file @$SHIB_DIST$/src/main/webapp/PrivacyLens/federation-logo.png@ (which is an empty placeholder logo by default).
_(For the SWITCHaai federation, the logo is available at "http://www.switch.ch/aai/design/images/switchaai-logo.png":http://www.switch.ch/aai/design/images/switchaai-logo.png.)_

h2. 2.4 Configure Shibboleth to honor PrivacyLens choices

Configure the Identity Provider to query PrivacyLens for attribute release
choices. Edit the file @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/attribute-filter.xml@ and make
each AttributeFilterPolicy contain a PermitValueRule that will query
PrivacyLens. The language used for the script is Javascript:

bc.. <afp:PermitValueRule xsi:type="basic:Script" >
    <basic:Script>
        <![CDATA[
            importPackage(Packages.edu.cmu.ece.PrivacyLens);
            IdPHelper.releaseFilter(filterContext, attributeId, attributeValue);
        ]]>
    </basic:Script>
</afp:PermitValueRule>

p. The return value of the last function called will determine the outcome
of this rule. If the return value is true, the attribute will be released
by the Identity Provider.

h2. 2.5 Configuring the Oracle

As there is currently no reliable transmission of requested and required
attributes from a Service Provider when it refers a user to his home
Identity Provider, PrivacyLens is currently referring to a configuration
file to provide these details. Adjust @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/spsetup.json@
to fit your environment. The file is in JSON(Javascript Object Notation)
format.

bc.. {
  "attrs":[
    {
      "id":Attribute identifier within Shibboleth,
      "desc":Human readable description of attribute
    },
    ...
  ],
  "SPs":[
    {
      "name":Human readable name of the Service Provider,
      "id":Service Provider identifier within Shibboleth,
      "attrGroups":[
        {
          "id":Attribute group identifier,
          "description":Human readable description of attribute group,
          "reason":HTML text describing reason for requesting the attribute group,
          "privpolicy":HTML text with privacy policy for attribute group data
        },
        ...
      ],
      "attrs":[
        {
          "id":Attribute identifier within Shibboleth,
          "reason":HTML text describing reason for requesting this attribute,
          "privpolicy":HTML text with privacy policy for this attribute,
          "required":Does the Service Provider require this attribute (true/false),
          "group":Group this attribute with others by this attribute group identifier
        },
        ...
      ]
    }
  ]
}

h2. 2.5 Deployment

To activate PrivacyLens, Shibboleth must be re-deployed:

bc. cd $SHIB_DIST$
./install.sh

You may also need to restart your Java web application server (e.g. Tomcat or Jetty).

h1. 3 Upgrade 

h2. 3.1 General procedure

Unless noted below, the general procedure for upgrading PrivacyLens is:-

* Unpack the distribution package to @$PLENS_DIST$.
* Replace the old version of the PrivacyLens jar file (@rm $SHIB_DIST$/lib/PrivacyLens-#old-version#.jar; cp $PLENS_DIST$/lib/PrivacyLens-#new-version#.jar $SHIB_DIST$/lib@).
* Update the JDBC dependencies (@cp $PLENS_DIST$/lib/jdbc/*.jar $SHIB_DIST$/lib@).
* Optionally update the JDBC connector for your database. PrivacyLens provides connectors for HSQL and MySQL. (e.g. if you are using HSQL as a database, @cp $PLENS_DIST$/lib/jdbc/optional/hsqldb-#version#.jar $SHIB_DIST$/lib@).
* Verify that only one version of each jar file is installed in @$SHIB_DIST$/lib@.
* Update the PrivacyLens view templates in @$SHIB_DIST$/src/main/webapp/PrivacyLens@. If you have previously customized these files, back up the old files first, and then re-apply the customizations.

You should at the least copy your organization's logo to the file @$SHIB_DIST$/src/main/webapp/PrivacyLens/logo.png@, since a placeholder logo is installed by default.
You may also want to put your federation's logo to the file @$SHIB_DIST$/src/main/webapp/PrivacyLens/federation-logo.png@ (which is an empty placeholder logo by default).
_(For the SWITCHaai federation, the logo is available at "http://www.switch.ch/aai/design/images/switchaai-logo.png":http://www.switch.ch/aai/design/images/switchaai-logo.png.)_

* Deploy Shibboleth as in section "Deployment":#a2.5Deployment above.

h1. 4 Advanced Deployment

This sections contains advanced configuration topics.

h2. 4.1 Custom SQL Statements

* Copy @$PLENS_DIST$/manual/storage/sql-statements.properties@ to @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.sql-statements.properties@.
* Adjust @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.sql-statements.properties@ according your needs.
* Enable your custom @sql-statements.properties@ in @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.xml@:

bc.. 
    <bean id="uApprove.touModule" class="ch.SWITCH.aai.uApprove.tou.ToUModule" ...>
        <!-- ... -->
        <property name="storage">
            <bean class="ch.SWITCH.aai.uApprove.tou.storage.JDBCStorage" ...
                p:sqlStatements="file:/$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.sql-statements.properties" ... />
        </property>
    </bean>
    
    <!-- ... -->
    
    <bean id="PrivacyLens.attributeReleaseModule" class="edu.cmu.ece.PrivacyLens.ar.AttributeReleaseModule" ...>
        <!-- ... -->
        <property name="storage">
            <bean class="edu.cmu.ece.PrivacyLens.ar.storage.JDBCStorage" ...
               p:sqlStatements="file:/$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.sql-statements.properties" ... />
        </property>
    </bean>
    
h2. 4.3 Templates

h3. Custom View Templates

Feel free to customize the PrivacyLens view templates in @$SHIB_DIST$/src/main/webapp/PrivacyLens/@.

h2. 4.4 Localization

h3. Custom Messages

You may provided custom messages by copying the directory @$PLENS_DIST$/manual/examples/messages@ to Shibboleth's classpath (e.g., @$SHIB_DIST$/src/main/webapp/WEB-INF/classes/PrivacyLens/messages@), and editing the files within.

Point PrivacyLens to use your custom messages by editing @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.xml@:

bc. 
    <bean id="PrivacyLens.viewHelper" class="ch.SWITCH.aai.uApprove.ViewHelper" ...
        p:messagesBase="PrivacyLens.messages" />

h2. 4.5 Strict Comparison

h3. Terms Of Use Content Comparison

If the Terms of Use module is enabled, by default only the version is compared to decide whether a user has accepted the terms. You can enable full-text comparison by making the following change in @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.xml@: 

bc. <bean id="uApprove.touModule" ... p:compareContent="true" ...


h2. 4.6 Audit Logging

PrivacyLens can write into Shibboleth's audit log at @$SHIB_INSTALL$/logs/idp-audit.log@.

h3. Enable Terms Of Use Audit Log

You can enable the Terms of Use audit log in in @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.xml@: 

bc. <bean id="uApprove.touModule" ... p:auditLogEnabled="true" ...

Example output:

bc. 20120101T010000Z|ch.SWITCH.aai.uApprove.PrivacyLens|||tou.acceptance|null|null|null|student1||1.0,5b2ee897c08c79a09cd57e8602d605bf8c52db17de9793677c36b5c78644b2b3,|

h2. 4.7 Black/Whitelisting

PrivacyLens can be configured to show or not show the interface, depending on
what Service Provider is involved. In the PrivacyLens.properties file,
regular expressions that the Service Provider will be matched again are
provided to "services". If "services.blacklist" is true, the user will
not see the interface for any Service Provider that matches the regular
expressions. If "services.blacklist" is false, the user will only see the
interface for Service Providers that match the regular expressions.

h3. Enable Attribute Release Audit Log

You can enable the attribute release module audit log in in @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/PrivacyLens.xml@:

bc. <bean id="PrivacyLens.attributeReleaseModule" ... p:auditLogEnabled="true" ...

Example output:

bc. 
20120101T010000Z|edu.cmu.ece.PrivacyLens||https://sp.example.org/shibboleth|ar.consent|null|null|null|student1||uid,surname,givenName,|
20120101T010000Z|edu.cmu.ece.PrivacyLens||https://sp.example.org/shibboleth|ar.clearConsent|null|null|null|student1|||
20120101T010000Z|edu.cmu.ece.PrivacyLens|||ar.generalConsent|null|null|null|student1|||

h1. 5 Troubleshooting

* Check @$SHIB_INSTALL$/logs/idp-process.log@ for @ERROR@ or @WARN@ messages.
* Check the web application container logs (e.g., Jetty's logs are in @$JETTY_HOME$/logs/@) for any error messages.

h2. Debugging

Enabling @DEBUG@ or @TRACE@ log level for PrivacyLens in @$SHIB_INSTALL$/conf/logging.xml@:

bc. <logger name="ch.SWITCH.aai.uApprove" level="DEBUG"/>
<logger name="edu.cmu.ece.PrivacyLens" level="DEBUG"/>

h1. 6 Feedback

Send general questions and comments to "privacylens@ece.cmu.edu":mailto:privacylens@ece.cmu.edu. For bug reports, please use our "issue tracking":https://github.com/cmu-cylab-privacylens/PrivacyLens/issues.

h1. 7 Abbreviations

{glossary}
